Go BOM RFC (#113)
paketo-buildpacks/rfcs: text/go/0001-go-bom.md

previous months
the [Node.JS BOM Module](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/nodejs/0013-install-bom.md) was
developed.

We would like to add support for BOM generation in the Go language family. We would like to create a new buildpack to
provide this. We do not anticipate the need for changes to other buildpacks in the language family.

We propose to support generating BOMs only for projects which utilize vendoring via `go mod`. At this time we do not
propose to support any other vendoring solutions
(e.g. `dep` or files copied directly into the `vendor` directory without a
`go.mod` file). Extending the new buildpack to support to other vendoring solutions could be a future RFC, if we
discover a clear requirement for this.

## Implementation

### Tool details

The Bill of Materials that will result should be an accurate accounting of all the modules that are defined and
installed by `go modules`.

There already exists a tool called [CycloneDX Gomod](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-gomod) which is an official
CycloneDX supported-tool that creates valid CycloneDX BOMs for Go applications. CycloneDX is a BOM format supported by

> the OWASP Foundation, and is a serious contender (at the time of this RFC creation) as a format we will eventually
> support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the OWASP Foundation, and is a format that we plan to support per the recently merged [upstream CNB RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0095-sbom.md).
```

Reviewer: Side note, now that the upstream CNB RFC has been merged in, do we need to add onto this initiative to include transitioning the BOM format from the legacy CNB format to SPDX/CycloneDX in a top-level RFC addendum? Or is this something we will tackle later? cc @ForestEckhardt @simonjjones

Reviewer 2: The RFC was approved, but there is no current support in the lifecycle for the new SBOM format. We can move forward with an RFC, but implementations would need to wait until there was lifecycle support.

installed via `go install github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-gomod`.

This tool supports three different cases of BOM generation:

1. `app`: Include only those modules that the target application actually depends on. Modules required by tests or
   packages that are not imported by the application are not included. Build constraints are evaluated, which enables a
   very detailed view of what's really compiled into an application's binary.
2. `mod`: Include the aggregate of modules required by all packages in the target module. This optionally includes
   modules required by tests and test packages. Build constraints are NOT evaluated, allowing for a "whole picture" view
   on the target module's dependencies.
3. `bin`: Offers support of generating rudimentary SBOMs from binaries built with Go modules.

Of these, we are only interested in `app`. The buildpacks do not currently support building modules, or libraries, which
is the primary use-case for `mod`. The `bin` command is for pre-built executables, which is unnecessary for the
buildpack as it has access to the source code. The BOM created by the `bin` command also contains less information than

> the one created via the `app` command.

Reviewer: Can you explain more why we are not interested in the `mod` case? Why wouldn't we want to include as much information about the dependency tree (and anything that comes into contact with the app) as possible?

* name,
* version,
* hash,
* source URI,
* license ID,
* and package URL

Note: The `license` field can be retrieved when the flag `-licenses` is passed to the command.

Almost all of fields that we aim to support
per [the Paketo BOM RFC](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0033-bill-of-materials.md#overall-schema)
are available. The only one that is not available is `description`, and this is because there is no standard way to
capture this information in Go projects (as compared with other languages like nodejs and rust, where the package
description files contain a field for this metadata). See unresolved questions below.

In order to support this tool in both the online and offline cases, we will host the binary tool on
the [dep-server](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/dep-server).

### Performance

The addition of this tool to the language family order groupings might have an impactful change to the overall
performance of the buildpacks.

Performance metrics are still TBD, but for a typical project (e.g. `pack`) we observe that it takes about 10-30 seconds
to construct a BOM.

We can investigate ways to improve this performance.

> ### Language Family Additions

Reviewer 3: @sophiewigmore was the analogous pre-populated `node_modules` case handled in the Nodejs BOM buildpack? What did y'all decide to do?

> ### Language Family Additions

Reviewer 4: @fg-j Sorry, I thought your previous comment was asking what the desired behavior is in the case where there is a populated `vendor` directory but no `go.mod` file. In that case `cyclonedx-gomod` fails to execute, so we propose that we do not support that case.

In the case where there is a valid `go.mod` file _and_ a pre-populated `vendor` directory (and vendoring is enabled), then if the `go.mod` file and the `vendor` directory are consistent, this is supported with some limitations. According to the `cyclonedx-gomod` README:

>Modules that use vendoring are, although in a limited manner, supported.
Limitations are as follows:
>
>* **No hashes.** Go doesn't copy all module files to vendor, only those that are required to build and test the main module. Because module checksums consider almost all files in a module's directory though, calculating accurate hashes from the vendor directory is not possible. As a consequence, SBOMs for modules that use vendoring do not include component hashes.
>* **License detection may fail.** Go doesn't always copy license files when vendoring modules, which may cause license detection to fail.

If the `go.mod` file is inconsistent with the `vendor` directory, is this even a valid situation for a go project?

Am I addressing your question, or am I still missing something?

> ### Language Family Additions

Reviewer 4: and yes, in the `node` case, the `cyclonedx-node-module` supports the pre-populated vendor directory without a `package.json`. That is essentially a difference between the `cyclonedx-node-module` and `cyclonedx-gomod` tools.

> ### Language Family Additions

Reviewer 3: > If the go.mod file is inconsistent with the vendor directory, is this even a valid situation for a go project?

If you're asking "Will the Go buildpack build it, as it's currently implemented?", I'm pretty sure the answer is yes. If you're asking "Is this a well-formed app?", IMO the answer is no.

Using the CycloneDX tool to generate the BOM will involve some changes to the Go language family buildpack order groups
as follows:

* A single BOM generation buildpack will be added. It's primary functions are:
    * perform the BOM dependency tool retrieval from the dep-server,
    * execute BOM generation with the tool (`cyclonedx-gomod app -o bom.json`), and

>     * contribute the BOM to the `launch.toml` `[bom]` label.

Reviewer: Might be worth noting that an extra conversion step will need to be performed between these two steps to convert the output JSON file to the legacy CNB TOML label format.

Reviewer 4: Sure, we can add that.

* Provides none

#### Build

The build phase will perform a few tasks as mentioned above.

1. Perform the BOM dependency tool retrieval from the dep-server. It will get added to a build-time layer. It will
   contribute a BOM entry for the tool itself on the `build.toml` `[bom]` section.

2. Execute BOM generation with the installed tool via the `cyclonedx-gomod app -o bom.json` command in the root
   directory of the application. There is an unresolved question around determining which main package to run against if
   the application source contains multiple `main` packages.

3. Unmarshal the CycloneDX JSON BOM and transform each BOM entry into a
   [`postal.Dependency`](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/packit/blob/c5a40518f2c6bd913ade999b9e2d58d6892d2ea9/postal/buildpack.go#L12)
   type. This step and step 5 will eventually go away if we support CycloneDX as a BOM format.

4. (Optionally) generate `CPE` and `pURL` from the data and add it to the
   `postal.Dependency`.

5. Run the
   [`postal.GenerateBillOfMaterials`](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/packit/blob/c5a40518f2c6bd913ade999b9e2d58d6892d2ea9/postal/service.go#L186)
   command.

> 6. Clean up the generated BOM file

Reviewer 4: Yeah, to be totally honest we are looking more at the implementation of the buildpack than the RFC, so we should update this RFC and also the other one for consistency.

#### Potential Future Optimizations

Given future user interest in a way to opt out of this buildpack beyond a custom order grouping, an optimization that
could be made is the inclusion of a

> `BP_ENABLE_MODULE_BOM` environment variable that can be set during container build-time.

Reviewer 3: Is this intentionally left out of scope for now? A penalty of 10-30 seconds per build seems steep without an off switch.

knowledge we would have to develop and maintain a program to recurse through all the go modules and their dependencies.

Second, there is a high likelihood that we will support CycloneDX as a BOM format in the future. In that case, we can
simply run the tool and return that BOM without any additional formatting or conversion. Going this route will minimize
the change needed down the road, and we can get a CycloneDX output we can feel confident about.

## Alternatives

An alternative to the option to using the CycloneDX BOM tool would be to hand-create the BOM as described. We could go
through each go module directory, pull information out of each `go.mod` file and then build out our own BOM with that
data. This is a viable option if installing a tool is not a reasonable choice.

An alternative to performing all of these steps in a separate buildpack would be to add the CycloneDX tool installation
as a step in the Go Build buildpack, and then run BOM creation alone in a buildpack before the start commands. This is
less than ideal because it's not transparent or intuitive to install it during the go specific build process. It makes

> more sense to separate all module BOM creation logic into its own buildpack, so that users may easily opt out.

Reviewer 2: The more I read of the RFC, the more I'm asking myself why we aren't pursuing this alternative. In this paragraph it appears that we have 2 concerns: 1) we need to install a tool, and 2) we want users to be able to opt-out.

For 1, I don't see why we couldn't introduce a buildpack that just does the tool installation and makes it available during build.
For 2, I also don't see why we need a separate buildpack to make this possible.

Can we elaborate a bit more on these concerns?

Reviewer: This is fair Ryan. Part of the decision behind the pattern we used in the Node Module BOM was because while we could've done it the way you've described in point # 1, except for the fact we'd still need a separate buildpack for the Node Start buildpack case. Because of that outlier, we decided to go with the pattern we have now to be consistent across the language family.

I don't think that same concern is relevant here, since the BOM only needs to be created for one order group scenario. Therefore, the plan you've described is viable as far as I know

Reviewer 2: I think I am much less concerned about the duplication of logic than I am about the decoupling of the BOM from the artifact and also the implicit coupling of this BOM buildpack to the implementations of those buildpacks doing the "work" of the build process.

Additionally, recording the BOM into a single place makes it more awkward for us to support other BOM use-cases going forward. For example, I'd like to see us also record parts of the BOM that are only used during the build phase. This separate buildpack will need to do quite a bit of reverse-engineering to discover how a particular artifact was used in the build process. This is obviously more difficult than just having each buildpack report what it used directly.

# Go BOM Generation

## Summary

Add support for the generation of the Bill of Materials in the Go Language Family in order to provide entries for
modules installed during the build process that can be found on the final app image.

## Motivation

As a part of an initiative to provide a Bill of Materials (BOM) for all the Paketo Language Family Buildpacks, in
previous months
the [Node.JS BOM Module](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/nodejs/0013-install-bom.md) was
developed.

We would like to add support for BOM generation in the Go language family. We would like to create a new buildpack
to provide this. We do not anticipate the need for changes to other buildpacks in the language family.

> We propose to support generating BOMs only for projects which utilse vendoring via `go mod`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We propose to support generating BOMs only for projects which utilize vendoring via `go mod`.
```

At this time we do not propose to support any other vendoring solutions
(e.g. `dep` or files copied directly into the `vendor` directory without a
`go.mod` file).
Extending the new buildpack to support to other
vendoring solutions could be a future RFC, if we discover a clear requirement for this.

## Implementation

### Tool details

The Bill of Materials that will result should be an accurate accounting of all the modules that are defined and

> installed by `go modudules`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
installed by `go modules`.
```

Author: Fixed!

2. `mod`: Include the aggregate of modules required by all packages in the target module. This optionally includes
   modules required by tests and test packages. Build constraints are NOT evaluated, allowing for a "whole picture" view
   on the target module's dependencies.
3. `bin`: Offers support of generating rudimentary SBOMs from binaries built with Go modules.

Of these, we are only interested in `app`. The buildpacks do not currently support building modules, or libraries, which
is the primary use-case for `mod`. The `bin` command is for pre-built executables, which is unnecessary for the
buildpack as it has access to the source code. The BOM created by the `bin` command also contains less information
than the one created via the `app` command.

The output BOM contains the following fields for each module:

* name,
* version,
* hash,
* source URI,
* license ID,
* and package URL

Note: The `license` field can be retrieved when the flag `-licenses` is passed to the command.

Almost all of fields that we aim to support
per [the Paketo BOM RFC](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0033-bill-of-materials.md#overall-schema)

> are available. The only one that is not available is `description`, and this is because there is no standard way to

Reviewer 5: I do not see `description` even as a recommended field in the said RFC

capture this information in Go projects (as compared with other languages like nodejs and rust, where the package
description files contain a field for this metadata). See unresolved questions
below.

In order to support this tool in both the online and offline cases, we will host
the binary tool on the [dep-server](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/dep-server).

### Performance

The addition of this tool to the language family order groupings might have an impactful change to the overall
performance of the buildpacks.

Performance metrics are still TBD, but for a typical project (e.g. `pack`) we observe that it takes about 10-30 seconds
to construct a BOM.

We can investigate ways to improve this performance.

### Language Family Additions

Using the CycloneDX tool to generate the BOM will involve some changes to the Go language family buildpack order
groups as follows:

* A single BOM generation buildpack will be added. It's primary functions are:
    * perform the BOM dependency tool retrieval from the dep-server,
    * execute BOM generation with the tool (`cyclonedx-gomod app -o bom.json`), and
    * contribute the BOM to the `launch.toml` `[bom]` label.

> * For the Go Mod buildpack order group, the BOM generation buildpack will run directly before the `go-build` buildpack.

Reviewer 5: Is there any particular reason this buildpack runs before go-build and not after? In my head, I think of doing accounting and writing a Bill of Materials as a last step one would do after all the build commands are completed.

Just for clarity, it would be nice if you can print out the entire order group here

Reviewer 4: No particular reason, except the BOM process doesn't require the build process to have run. We modeled this ordering off the nodejs BOM buildpack, and this is the analogous ordering to what that language family does.

We're happy to change the ordering if folks prefer that.

Reviewer: This order grouping makes sense to me logically since the BOM creation directly will need the Go modules. +1 to getting the full order group in the RFC.

Reviewer 4: @sophiewigmore which ordering do you prefer? The one that is written, or the proposed change? Either is fine by us.

Happy to add the full ordering here for clarity.

Reviewer 2: You would need to generate the BOM before the `go-build` buildpack runs because it removes all of the source from the working directory: https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/go-build/blob/c40e20b61d57bed68095055814b10b74f4b1e617/build.go#L87-L90

After it executes, there won't be any `go.mod` or `go.sum` files to help with generating the BOM.

Second, there is a high likelihood that we will support CycloneDX as a BOM format in the future. In that case, we can
simply run the tool and return that BOM without any additional formatting or conversion. Going this route will minimize
the change needed down the road, and we can get a CycloneDX output we can feel confident about.

## Alternatives

An alternative to the option to using the CycloneDX BOM tool would be to hand-create the BOM as described. We could go
through each go module directory, pull information out of each `go.mod` file and then build out our own BOM with that
data. This is a viable option if installing a tool is not a reasonable choice.

An alternative to performing all of these steps in a separate buildpack would be to add the CycloneDX tool installation
as a step in the Go Build buildpack, and then run BOM creation alone in a buildpack before the start commands. This is
less than ideal because it's not transparent or intuitive to install it during the go specific build process. It makes
more sense to separate all module BOM creation logic into its own buildpack, so that users may easily opt out.

## Unresolved Questions and Bikeshedding

> * How do we know which of the main commands we are building and hence which main package to generate the BOM?

Reviewer 5: I think an idea would be to make use of `$BP_GO_TARGETS` ([link](BP_GO_TARGETS)) just like how `go-build` buildpack does. I'd say that every "main" target that will be subject to compilation should have its bom present as the user can dynamically set any of them as the container start-command during run.

via `go mod`. At this time we do not propose to support any other vendoring
solutions (e.g. `dep` or files copied directly into the `vendor` directory
without a `go.mod` file). Supporting other vendoring solutions could be a future
RFC, if we discover a clear requirement for this. The primary reason for this is
that the `cyclonedx-gomod` tool (see the Implementation section below) does not
support generating BOMs for these alternative vendoring mechanisms.

## Implementation

### Tool details

The Bill of Materials that will result should be an accurate accounting of all
the modules that are defined and installed by `go mod`.

There already exists a tool called [CycloneDX Gomod](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-gomod)
which is an official CycloneDX-supported tool that creates valid CycloneDX BOMs
for Go applications. CycloneDX is a BOM format supported by the OWASP
Foundation, and is a serious contender (at the time of this RFC creation) as a
format we will eventually support.

The CycloneDX Go Module tool is available as a pre-built binary for multiple
platforms, and also it can easily be installed via `go install

> github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-gomod`.

Reviewer 3: Great point. Thanks for the clarification.

* and package URL

Note: The `license` field can be retrieved when the flag `-licenses` is passed to the command.

Almost all of fields that we aim to support per
[the Paketo BOM RFC](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0033-bill-of-materials.md#overall-schema)
are available. The only one that is not available is `description`, and this is
because there is no standard way to capture this information in Go projects (as
compared with other languages like nodejs and rust, where the package
description files contain a field for this metadata). See unresolved questions
below.

In order to support this tool in both the online and offline cases, we will host
the binary tool on the
[dep-server](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/dep-server).

### Performance

The addition of this tool to the language family order groupings might have an
impactful change to the overall performance of the buildpacks.

Performance metrics are still TBD, but for a typical project (e.g.
[`pack`](https://github.com/buildpacks/pack)) we observe that it takes about
10-30 seconds to construct a BOM.

We can investigate ways to improve this performance. In the meantime, we propose

> including an environment variable: `BP_DISABLE_MODULE_BOM` (which defaults to
> `false`) to skip BOM generation if it takes an unacceptable duration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
including an environment variable: `BP_MODULE_BOM_ENABLED` (which defaults to
`true`) to skip BOM generation if it takes an unacceptable duration.
```

case the entire parent repository must be uploaded to `pack`, or some other
option must be considered (e.g. using git submodules).

The `cyclonedx-gomod` tool requires a `go.mod` file - it fails to run without
one. So, if we wish to support vendoring directly without a `go.mod` file we
will need to explore an alternative tool, or find a way for `cyclonedx-gomod` to
support this.

### Language Family Changes

There will be a single new buildpack called `cyclonedx-gomod` which will
provide the `cyclonedx-gomod` executable. It will install this binary onto the
`$PATH` which makes it available for the `go-build` buildpack to use during the
`build` phase when generating a BOM.

This buildpack will always pass detection, and will `provide` the dependency
`cyclonedx-gomod` with no version. This buildpack will require nothing.

This new buildpack will behave similarly to the
[`dep`](https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/dep) buildpack.

The `go-build` buildpack will optionally `require` this `cyclonedx-gomod`
dependency, depending on whether it will run BOM generation. Pseudo-code for
this optional `require` looks as follows:

```

> if BP_DISABLE_MODULE_BOM is unset/false and go.mod file exists:
>     require: go-dist, cyclonedx-gomod
> else:
>     require: go-dist

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
if BP_MODULE_BOM_ENABLED is false and go.mod file exists:
    require: go-dist, cyclonedx-gomod
else:
    require: go-dist
```

    version = "0.3.1"

  <b>[[order.group]]</b>
    <b>id = "paketo-buildpacks/cyclonedx-gomod"</b>
    <b>version = "x.y.z"</b>

  [[order.group]]
    id = "paketo-buildpacks/go-build"
    version = "0.4.1"

  [[order.group]]
    id = "paketo-buildpacks/procfile"
    optional = true
    version = "4.4.1"

  [[order.group]]
    id = "paketo-buildpacks/environment-variables"
    optional = true
    version = "3.2.2"

  [[order.group]]
    id = "paketo-buildpacks/image-labels"
    optional = true
    version = "3.2.2"
</pre>

#### Detection

There will be no changes to detection for any existing buildpacks in the Go
language family. As mentioned above, the new `cyclonedx-gomod` buildpack will
always pass detection and provide `cyclonedx-gomod` with no version.

#### Build

The new `cyclonedx-gomod` buildpack build phase will perform the following:

1. Perform the BOM dependency tool retrieval from the dep-server. It will get
   added to a build-time layer. It will contribute a BOM entry for the tool
   itself on the `build.toml` `[bom]` section. This will behave similarly to the
   `dep` buildpack.

The build phase in the `go-build` buildpack will perform the tasks highlighted

> below. If there is no `go.mod` file present, or the `BP_DISABLE_MODULE_BOM`
> environment variable is set to `true`, the `go-build` build phase will skip BOM
> generation entirely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
below. If there is no `go.mod` file present, or the `BP_MODULE_BOM_ENABLED`
environment variable is set to `false`, the `go-build` build phase will skip BOM
generation entirely.
```

> 1. Parse the `BP_DISABLE_MODULE_BOM` environment variable, skip BOM generation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Parse the `BP_MODULE_BOM_ENABLED` environment variable, skip BOM generation
```
